Add lab b4 (#152)
0xcf/decal-web: labs/b4.md

---
title: Beginner Lab 4 - Debian, packages, compiling software
layout: lab
---

## What is a distribution?

> A distribution is a combination of the a kernel, init system, libraries,

Reviewer: Should probably explain (or at least link to the ArchWiki for kernel / init systems / library / drivers)

drivers, and other critical software. There are many distributions, for Linux

> and other kernels as well, such as BSD and Solaris.

Reviewer: Hyperlink to BSD and Solaris wikipedia page or something else

## What should I use then?

Currently, there are around 300 actively developed Linux distributions listed
on [DistroWatch](https://distrowatch.com). It might be a bit overwhelming with

> so many choices. Popular distributions include Debian, Ubuntu, Arch Linux,

Reviewer: Maybe talk a little bit (footnotes) about why they are different instead of just saying they are different.

Author: I think I will leave this to you.

this.

Enter the package manager, a centralized way to install, update, and remove
software from your computer using verified sources called repositories.  Most
package managers work in the same way: the package manager gets a list of
packages from the repository, and then, when asked to install a package,
fetches the package from the repository, verifies that it is legit, and
installs it. A package manager is like a librarian. When a patron wants to read
a book, the librarian consults a catalog (which is the package database) and
then fetches the book from the shelf and gives it to the patron (installing the
package).  Sometimes, the librarian has to update the catalog because new
editions of the books were added (updating the package database). When the
patron is done, the librarian knows where to return the book (cleaning up after
removing a package).  Contrast this to the approach on Windows, where dedicated
uninstaller programs are occasionally necessary as the OS does not know where
programs install their own files.

## Debian: An Example

In this class, we will be focused on using Debian. As noted before, Debian uses

> `apt` or `dpkg` as its package manager.

Reviewer: Explain the difference between `apt` and `dpkg` (and probably tell them that they should mostly be using `apt`)

We invoke the package manager by using `apt`. Before installing anything, you
shoud update your local copy of packages and versions to ensure the package

> manager installs the latest and most up-to-date packages. To do that, run:

Reviewer: Small nit: This paragraph is slightly confusing in differentiating between package lists / metadata and package binaries themselves.

    $ sudo apt update

> To find the package to install:

Reviewer: Maybe explain why sudo is needed for some and not others?

    $ apt search [package|description]

To install a package, run:

    $ sudo apt install package

To remove a package, run:

    $ sudo apt remove package

Easy? When you want to upgrade the packages that you have installed when
new versions are released, you can do so by calling:

    $ sudo apt upgrade

> There are also other commands, such as removing unneeded dependencies (`sudo

Reviewer: Explain what a dependency is

> apt autoremove`) and purging packages (`sudo apt purge`) but that is what the

Reviewer: Explain the difference between purging and removing

Author: We reference them to the man pages, I think that is ok.

man pages are for.

### Example

> We are going to install GCC for the next step of the lab.

Reviewer: Explain what GCC is

**This, and all other parts of the lab, should be done on your DigitalOcean
VMs, as you cannot install packages on OCF machines.**

Please note that you can only connect to your VM from inside the Berkeley
network, so you will have to either be on campus wifi, or you will have to SSH
through `ssh.ocf.berkeley.edu` (or a similar on-campus host) to access your VM.
You should be able to connect to it at `<OCF username>.decal.xcf.sh` by running
`ssh <username>@<username>.decal.xcf.sh` and the password you set when your
first logged in, or using the email you received.

Simply run:

    $ sudo apt install gcc

Now check if GCC is installed by running the following to check GCC's version:

    $ gcc --version

> Now install the `ruby-dev` and `ruby-ffi` packages for the next parts of the

Reviewer: Explain what these packages are, or show them how to use `apt show $pkg` to learn. (pref both)

lab.

## But what about software that isn’t in the repositories?

Sometimes it happens that a program you want to install hasn't been
packaged for your distributions, or hasn't been packaged at all. You have
several options in this scenario to install the software you want:

#### Warning:
**Installing software not from a repository carries the same risks as
installing software from a random .exe or .msi on Windows.**

Linux is popularly considered more secure than Windows or MacOS because of
its use of repositories -- but a malicious package installed manually can
pwn your system as easily as malware on any other OSes.
**Use common sense! Only manually install from sources you trust.**

*(For users of Ubuntu: PPAs, or third-party repositories, carry the same
risks of running malicious third-party code.)*

If the developers provide a package compatible with your distribution (.deb for
Debian-based distros), you can download that package and install it using:

>     $ sudo apt install ./package.deb

Reviewer: This path isn't always correct

Another way is to find a generic binary package from the developer. This can

> come in the form of shady shell scripts, or a binary tarball that you can just

Reviewer: Explain what a tarball is maybe? Footnote is probably the best option since tarballs have briefly been mentioned before

box but we won’t covering the details of making a package yourself (there are
tools that do that for you and it varies from platform to platform).

## So how do I compile?

Compiling software on Linux can be a mixed bag. Sometimes, all the dependencies
(like libraries) are installed on your computer and there is no fiddling around.
Sometimes, the dependencies don’t even exist pre-compiled for your distribution
so you have to compile those yourself in order to compile what’s at hand. Most
of the time, these steps are simplified through the use of a Makefile, which
controls the Make build system.

In most source tarballs, there is usually a Makefile that contains a set of
directives to compile a project. This is because there are usually multiple
files across many directories that need to be compiled together into the
final executable. On top of that, there are multiple settings that control, for
example, optimizations, size of the executable, static vs. dynamic linking,
and whether to link against system libraries or alternatives.

Many projects that have to be compiled are usually in C, C++, or similar
lower-level languages. On most Linux distributions, there are usually three

> compiler “options”. There is the GNU Toolchain which provides `gcc` or the GNU

Reviewer: Either this paragraph should be up near `apt install gcc` or that command should be down here.

C Compiler, LLVM which provides `clang`, and Intel’s proprietary toolkit,
`icc`. Both `gcc` and `clang` are open-source and free software. While `clang`
was designed to be a drop-in replacement for `gcc`, several quirks remain that
make porting large programs nontrivial.

To compile software that provides a Makefile, assuming you have the
dependencies, simply type:

    $ make

> This is will usually choose the correct compiler and compile the whole project.

Reviewer: Maybe show the internals of an example Makefile?

Author: I think that is out of scope. There are already a lot of concepts and I don't want information overload.

Once the compilation is done, the resulting executables are usually stored in
`./bin` or `./build`.

GCC and clang also have compiler flags that allow certain features to be
enabled. Usually the flags that actually matter are optimization flags.
Depending on what you want to optimize for, either space or memory or speed,
there is a flag for it.

Now, we will make a very simple application in C that prints “Hello Penguin!”
named `hellopenguin`. Run:

    $ nano hellopenguin.c

to create a file named `hellopenguin.c`, and type in the following:

    #include <stdio.h>
    int main()
    {
        printf("Hello Penguin!");
        return 0;
    }

Now save and exit.

We will now compile the source file that you have just written:

    $ gcc hellopenguin.c -o hellopenguin

What this does is take the source file `hellopenguin.c` and compile it, writing
the executable output to a file named `hellopenguin`.

# How do I package stuff?

Packaging manually for Debian can frustrating, especially for first timers.

> That’s why for this class, we’ll be using a really cool Ruby gem called `fpm` which

Reviewer: unpack the acronym

simplifies the task of packaging a lot. Please note that if you were going to
package for Debian’s own repositories, this is NOT the  correct/formal way to
go about packaging. It is merely a great way to backport or package your own
applications extremely quickly. First, make sure `ruby` and its own package
manager called `gem` is installed. If they aren't, run `sudo apt install

> ruby-dev ruby-ffi`.  Now run the following to install `fpm` locally:

Reviewer: These instructions are redundant from above. The first one should be removed as the command makes more sense in this context.

    $ gem install fpm --user

Try invoking `fpm` and if it doesn’t work, add `~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/bin` to your

> `PATH`. To do that, add this to your `.bashrc`, or just type the following into

Reviewer: have we explained what PATH is?

Bash to temporarily add it to your PATH:

    $ export PATH=~/.gem/ruby/2.3.0/bin:$PATH

Now we will create a very simple package using the `hellopenguin` executable
that you made above. First, we will make a new folder named `packpenguin` and
move into it:

    $ mkdir packpenguin

    $ cd packpenguin

Now we will create the folder structure of where the executable will reside.

In Debian, user-level packages usually reside in the folder `/usr/bin/`.

    $ mkdir -p usr/bin

Now move your `hellopenguin` into the `packpenguin/usr/bin/` folder.

    $ cd ../ # cd into the directory where the hellpenguin executable is
    $ mv hellopenguin packpenguin/usr/bin/

Now we will create a package called `hellopenguin`. Move into the parent
directory of the hellopenguin folder and invoke the following:

    $ fpm -s dir -t deb -n hellopenguin -v 1.0~ocf1 -C packpenguin

This specifies that you want to take in a directory, using the `-s` flag, and
to output a .deb package using the `-t` flag. It takes in a directory called
`packpenguin`, using the `-C` flag, and output a .deb file named hellopenguin,

> using `-n`, with a version number of `1.0~ocf1`, using the `-v` flag.

Reviewer: Explain why the version is formatted as such

Author: I think that is unnecessary detail.

---
title: Beginner Lab 4 - Debian, packages, compiling software
layout: lab
---

## What is a distribution?

A distribution is a combination of the
[kernel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kernel_(operating_system)),
[init system](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Init), libraries,
drivers, and other critical software. There are many distributions, for Linux
and other kernels as well, such as
[BSD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkeley_Software_Distribution)
and [Solaris](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(operating_system)).

## What should I use then?

Currently, there are around 300 actively developed Linux distributions listed
on [DistroWatch](https://distrowatch.com). It might be a bit overwhelming with
so many choices. Popular distributions include Debian, Ubuntu, Arch Linux,
CentOS, and Red Hat Enterprise Linux, but in this course, we’ll only be using

> Debian.

Reviewer 2: the VMs are actually Ubuntu 18.04

Author: smh my head

manager installs the latest and most up-to-date packages. To do that, run:

    $ sudo apt update

To find the package to install (note this doesn't change the state of your computer, so
you don't sudo to search):

    $ apt search [package|description]

To install a package, run:

    $ sudo apt install package

To remove a package, run:

    $ sudo apt remove package

Easy? When you want to upgrade the packages that you have installed when
new versions are released, you can do so by calling:

    $ sudo apt upgrade

There are also other commands, such as removing unneeded dependencies (dependencies
are other packages a package needs), `sudo apt autoremove`, and purging packages
(`sudo apt purge`). You are encouraged to look at the man pages regarding these commands.

### Example

We are going to install the C compiler [GCC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Compiler_Collection)
for the next step of the lab.

Simply run:

    $ sudo apt install gcc

Now check if GCC is installed by running the following to check GCC's version:

    $ gcc --version

**This, and all other parts of the lab, should be done on your DigitalOcean

> VMs, as you cannot install packages on OCF machines.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
student VM, as you cannot install packages on OCF machines.**
```

> Please note that you can only connect to your VM from inside the Berkeley

Reviewer 2: not true this sem
